I have just completed the IBM Generative AI Engineering with LLMs specialization:

https://www.coursera.org/account/accomplishments/specialization/Y4OEU32FYBF6

It's worthwhile spending 3 months on the fundamentals of natural language processing (NLP) and large language models (LLMs) then learning how to write a chatbot with RAG and LangChain. 

Here are the takeaways from my fresh memory. I decided not to look at anything, everything just comes out from my brain. The high side of this approach is that I can build a logical story, the low side is that I might lose  accuracy. But you can always look for accurate statements, definitions, equations in tons of online/offline documents on this topic. I think a logical story will provide a big picture of how main ideas are connected.
The specialization has 7 courses. 

The first 2 courses just walk you through some basics of NLP and getting familiar with tokens, tokenizers, and tokenization, which roughly means separating sentences into words (not quite, but just good for now). Then you will learn about token embedding, which I think it is where the magic starts. Basically, all the tokens are collected to build a vocabulary, and a tokens is represented by an one-hot vector, whose components are all 0s except for one 1 at the position corresponding to the order of the token in the vocabulary. That vector has no meaning until being embedded in a multi-dimensional space (typically 768 dimensions, not sure why 768 though), which is a fancy way of saying, multiplying the transpose of the vector with an embedding matrix of dimensions: vocabulary size x embedding dimension (768). Here is my speculation, I suspected that the embedding space is where human/universe's concepts and events live and its "orthogonal" basic vectors represent concepts like color, kindness, innovation, objects, family, love, physics, math, ...etc. Then boom!!! Your tokens suddenly have meanings. More amazingly, if you add the embeddings of "The", "object", "that", "supplies", "light", "to", "the", "Earth" you will probably find that it is very close to the embedding vector of "The Sun". How the elements of the embedding matrixes are fine-tuned, I don't know. 

I guess I got too excited about the token embedding and forgot one important takeaway from courses 1 and 2, which is, the meaning of "generative" in this context is to generate a new token one-by-one based on previously provided tokens . For the next token, the model just spits out the probability of all tokens in the dictionary based on previous tokens and select the one with the highest probability.

I think course 3 (or 4, couldn't remember) is the heart of NLP, where it presents the mechanism of attention or self-attention. This is where the transformer, a revolutionary neural network architecture based on the attention mechanism, radically differs from other architectures, for example, convolutional neural network (CNN) used in computer vision. The basic idea is to find the way to quantify how much each token affects all other tokens in a sentence. Combining all the row vectors of token embeddings of a sentence will give us a matrix of size: sentence length x embedding dimension. After multiplying this matrix with 3 matrixes "big" Query, Key, Value of dimension: embedding dimension x embedding dimension, we'll get 3 "small" query, key, value matrixes of dimension: sentence length x sentence length. Now multiply the "small" matrixes value x query x transpose of key, we will get a score matrix of size: sentence length x sentence length, which "scores" how much each token affects all other tokens in the sentence. This score matrix is then converted back to matrix of dimension sentence length x embedding dimension through linear layers effectively completing one layer or a transformer, there is multiplying factor of square root of the embedding dimension here, but it is jus a minor detail. Elements of the "big" Query, Key, Value matrixes and the linear layers are learnable via training. One intuition for the use of Query, Key, Value matrixes comes from the process of database searching where you find the key in the database that matches the query then from the query infer the value. In the course, they provides an intuition based on translation process from one language to another one       